The idea that we all have to get past
the same finish line at the same time
in order for things to work out right,
we all have to be saved before we die,
or something like this,
that doesn't make nearly as much
sense as we are developing flower garden.
We are different types of flowers which
are developing and emerging
over large periods of time.
Keep watching to learn more!
Book four in the New Thinking Allowed dialogue
series, Charles T. Tart, 70 Years of Exploring
Consciousness and
Parapsychology, now available on Amazon.
Exploring Consciousness and Parapsychology, now
available on Amazon.
New Thinking Allowed is presented
by the California Institute for Human Science,
a fully accredited university offering distant
learning graduate degrees that focus on mind,
body and spirit. The topics that we cover here, we
are particularly excited to announce new degrees
emphasizing parapsychology and the paranormal.
Visit their website at cihs.edu.
Thinking Allowed. Conversations on the
leading edge of knowledge and discovery
with psychologist Jeffrey Mishlove.
Hello and welcome. I'm Emmy Vadnais,
co-host with Jeffrey Mishlove.
Our topic today is Collective Karma and
Reincarnation with my guest, Chris Bache,
who is Professor Emeritus in the Department of
Philosophy and Religious Studies at Youngstown
State University in Ohio where he taught for
33 years. He is also Adjunct Faculty at the
California Institute of Integral Studies, Emeritus
Fellow at the Institute of Noetic Sciences and
on the Advisory Council of Grof Legacy Training.
Chris is author of four books, Life Cycles,
Reincarnation and the Web of Life, Dark
Night, Early Dawn, The Living Classroom,
Teaching and Collective Consciousness
and LSD in the Mind of the Universe,
Diamonds from Heaven. If you enjoy this program,
please like, subscribe, press the bell icon and
share. Chris is joining us from just north
of Asheville in Weaverville, North Carolina.
Now I'll switch over to the internet video.
Welcome, Chris. It is a great joy to be with
you on New Thinking Allowed today. Thank you,
Emmy. It's wonderful to be
in conversation with you.
This is our second interview together,
although we also had a live stream.
And in that first conversation, we talked about
your great book, LSD in the Mind of the Universe,
Diamonds from Heaven. And I'll link to that
interview in the upper right corner of the screen.
In your book and in that conversation, you
shared about how through your 73 LSD sessions,
you experienced many deaths and rebirths.
And today we're going to explore the notion
that it sounds like you came
to an understanding of that we
all have our own individual or personal karma,
and that we do reincarnate for the collective
good or benefit of all toward what
you describe as the future human.
Yeah. To get us started, how did you
become interested in this topic of
personal but also collective
karma and reincarnation?
Well, the first book I wrote as an academic was
Life Cycles, Reincarnation and the Web of Life.
So I was interested in reincarnation early in my
career. I encountered Ian Stevenson's research
at the University of Virginia. At about the
same time, I encountered Stan Grof's research
in his book, Realms of the Human Unconscious.
So I really took in Stevenson's research
deeply, and I began to see the world in a way
that I had never seen it before. I began to see
the world in terms of reincarnation through a lens
of reincarnation, understanding that every life
is continuation of lives lived in the past
and is leading towards lives in the future.
So I began to study the
evidence for reincarnation,
and I studied a lot of past life therapy
cases, and I began to sort of understand the
deeper mechanisms of how lives start many things,
they don't get finished, and they sometimes
experience injury and wounds that don't get
healed, or they have hopes and expectations
that are not fulfilled. And those transfer into
subsequent former lives, not in a simple or
simplistic way, but in a very complex and subtle
way, that we are living in
a sense the continuation
of projects that began before our life,
and our life will lead to a continuation
of projects after we die, after our body dies.
So that was all kind of working itself out in my
mind. And then when I entered into my psychedelic
work, that was all affirmed, and that was
elaborated. I had numerous
experiences of former lives,
and the reality of reincarnation as just a
fact of life was presented as kind of a natural
exposition of spiritual reality and how
the physical world and the spiritual world
are deeply intertwined in this evolutionary
process. But all of that thought of so far
is all on the level of personal karma, you know,
personal cause and effect, personal choice,
conditionings transferred from lifetime to
lifetime. But in the process of doing the
psychedelic exploration, I also dropped in, began
to drop into levels of consciousness that were not
personal but were collective. Jung's concept of
the collective unconscious is an early exploration
of this idea that I've dropped into levels of
reality, of conscious reality, where the working
unit was not an individual human being, but the
working unit was an entire species. And I began
to have experiences that were working themselves
out in my individual psychedelic sessions that
were not personal. They were really focused on
collective dynamics, so that I describe in a
chapter called The Ocean of Suffering, entering
into what I later came to understand were memory
matrices held in the collective psyche of all
the suffering that members of its species had
experienced if it was unresolved by the time
they died, memories of war, of killing, of rape,
of pain, drought, incest, just lots and lots
of painful memories. And I began to understand
that just as the individual can be burdened by
their past trauma, the psyche of the collective
consciousness of our species is likewise burdened
by its collective trauma. And then so that led to
a deepening of an understanding about the
relationship of individual and collective
karma, individual karma and collective karma. That
really is the fundamental theme of my second book,
Dark Night, Early Dawn, that has to do with
examining that when you go very, very deep,
that boundary between the individual and the
collective dissolves, and it leads to a much
more dynamic relationship between what's happening
in our individual lives and what's happening in
this life of the species of which we are part.
And that, of course, is contextualized within
the life of the planet, the life of the galaxy
and so on and so forth. And so I just had many
experiences of being initiated into the life
of our species at a collective level. So I
dissolved, not like into the mystical state of
oneness with God, but before getting to that,
I dissolved into the consciousness of our
species. And I began to have experiences
of how the species is evolving through
collective karma and collective reincarnation,
and individuals within that matrix are
evolving through individual karma and
individual reincarnation.
Before we go any further,
I know we mentioned this
in our previous interview.
We are not suggesting that people engage in LSD
per se in order to have these same experiences.
It's not necessary for a person to get
in touch with these parts of themselves
to use those substances necessarily. Absolutely.
What I did was illegal. I did it because
I felt that it was wrong for these important
mind-opening drugs to be made illegal.
But I would never recommend that anyone else
break the law. And there are other techniques
that we can use in order to get access to these
deep levels of consciousness. This is simply just
one of the ways that I entered into this domain.
I also did three years of hypnotherapy, exploring
my own former lives in that process. It had
nothing to do with any psychedelics at all.
You have a whole career as a professor of
philosophy of religion. What can you share
with us about the spiritual evidence, if you will?
And then we can go to the scientific evidence as
well for reincarnation. Well, I start on the
empirical side. I found Ian Stevenson's work
intellectually and philosophically compelling.
He and his teams have done research and contacted
thousands of children around the world who have
spontaneous memories of their most immediate
previous life. And he was able to document those
memories in sufficient detail to be, I think,
intellectually credible and providing overwhelming
evidence that reincarnation is just a fact of
life. Then later, when I began to study in
past life therapy literature, and I began to
walk and work with people who had experience
helping people remember their deep past in order
to heal, but also in order to bring forward
consciously the many gifts that are stored in
their past. Because not all, you know, we have a
tendency to think that we inherit mostly problems
from our past, but that's not true. We inherit
all the pluses, all the benefits, all the
hard work that they've done in certain areas.
In my meditation, I began to experience the
boundaryless nature of consciousness itself.
I knew that there were dimensions of my mind,
my consciousness that were transpersonal,
that went beyond my personal identity.
And then when I went into deeper psychedelic
work, I had many experiences which showed me that
reincarnation is simply true. It's just a fact
of life. And Stevenson's evidence is really,
really important, but it's the tip of the iceberg.
Because by itself, his evidence does not give us a
comprehensive picture of how reincarnation works,
how the universe is working in reincarnation.
There's so much we don't know. I mean, I want to
say upfront, we don't have any idea of what the
physics of the soul is. We don't know how
consciousness leaves at death and brings all
the memories forward. We don't really understand
the physics of how that consciousness reintegrates
with another incarnation, how its store of
knowledge interacts with or interfaces with
genetic conditions, genetic and social conditions.
There's so much that we don't know. There's a lot
to be learned with research
ahead. But experientially,
when you remember your previous
lives and when you run deep
into the fabric of life so that you
begin to understand that our entire
species is reincarnating generation by generation,
it's not just individuals who are living and
growing. The entire species is living and growing
collectively in that process. It's just there's
theory and then there's direct experience. And in
this case, theory and direct experience reinforce
each other. Yes, and your experiences using LSD
and other forms of substances to take you deeper
beyond your personal self, you described how you
really felt a sense of oneness. And can you kind
of recap that a little bit for us or for those
who might be new to your story? This is a deeper
theme than simply the theme of reincarnation.
So let's go there and then we can bring it back
into reincarnation however you would like. The
truth of reincarnation is a truth that we are an
evolving consciousness over a large, large swath
of time. But there are many other truths. And one
of the other truths is if we ask, where did
we come from? And what are we? And in essence,
underneath all this social conditioning and
psychological conditioning, what are we?
And there, the spiritual traditions are
very clear and they speak with one voice,
that the essence of the individual is the
essence of the totality, that we are at core,
our essence is the essence of the divine, or
the essence of God, if you use that language.
And so that's another truth. And then you go
deeper into that, you realize that what your
essence is, is the same as the essence of every
living thing in this world, every so-called
inanimate thing. So that when that happens, when
that opens, there's a profound feeling of oneness
that, in a sense, self dissolves in the sense of
there being a boundary, a firm boundary between
self and other that disappears.
And one experiences the marvelous
miracle of life living and breathing
as one. You are just part of life.
It's surrounding you. There's
a profound feeling of intimacy,
kinship, those graces of being touched by
oneness. They can change your life forever,
because it shows you a truth that even
if you can't sustain that experience,
you've seen the truth, you know the truth of
it. You can use that truth to guide your life.
It leads you to become more
compassionate with people.
It leads you to become more compassionate
with yourself. You always are kind of
spontaneously looking out
for the good of the whole.
That's the natural outcome of experiencing
oneness, is compassion. That's why in the
mystical traditions, wisdom, insight, and
compassion move hand in hand. The deeper
you experience oneness, the more compassionate
you become. Can you describe a little bit about
your own personal experience of that oneness and
what that was like for you? That's a challenging
question, because to answer your question, I have
to remember. And to remember, I have to sink into
the memory, otherwise just a reading of headlines
of it. And that takes a little time. But working
within the restrictions we have, one of the
things I learned is oneness is not like a switch
that goes on and off. But there are many degrees
of oneness. There are many stages of initiation
into oneness. One can have a perception of
oneness. One can touch the edges of oneness and
feel the truth of oneness in the world. But then
you can go deeper into actually kind of dissolving
into the quantum structure, if you will. I'm using
that metaphorically of oneness. It's a deeper
immersion in the living totality of life. It's
challenging because at least what I've learned
is that deeper states of consciousness exist at
higher levels of energy. So the deeper you're
going into a reality in the consciousness, you're
going into a higher and higher and higher level
of energy. So oneness with the totality or
oneness with the divine is an extremely intense
state of consciousness and state of
energy to move into. And in my case,
I approached it through going through years
and years of very intense purifications
in my psychedelic sessions. When that oneness,
when you're graced with an opening into oneness,
it's like the entire world comes alive in a new
way. And it's like there's a song in the world
that you maybe hadn't heard before, but
it's always been there. There is a joy
and a falling away of all forms of loneliness and
a birthing into an exquisite spiritual intimacy.
I should say it's an intimacy which is both
spiritual and physical because it overflows
in compassion towards the world. And it also
overflows in homecoming, a feeling of homecoming
to one's essential nature, one's essential
being. And it's like, finally I found you,
or finally I've been found by you. And
then it's just how deep do you want to go?
How deep into the oneness of existence do you
dare to go? And I think if one goes too fast,
it becomes very challenging and difficult.
It takes time to assimilate oneness. And then
it takes time after you've had the experience to
know what to do with it. We talk about integrating
our psychedelic experiences. And I'm thinking
in many ways that we don't really understand yet
how these profound experiences are
impacting our psychological development,
our psychospiritual development, because
Indigenous people have been having these
experiences for millennia, of course. But we
in the West are relatively new to cultivating
these experiences. And so we're taking all of our
learning and all of our scientific knowledge and
all of our high academic knowledge into these
states. And in some ways, we're like the first
generation to combine everything that we have
learned about the world from science and critical
analysis, and now entering into these deep,
deep states of consciousness. And we're holding
memories that very few people in history
have tried to hold. We're holding memories
of profound transcendence, profound intimacy
with the divine, profound transcendence of time,
moving into deep time, permutations of
time, moving into cosmic void experiences.
And those are living memories. I mean, I can
tell you what I was doing on a particular day
and a particular year 30 years ago. They're
very specific. And I remember them the way that
most people remember their 50th birthday party.
You can just remember it.
But how those experiences,
which are so transcendent, how they are impacting
us and infusing themselves deeper into our being,
I think we're just beginning
to map some of those processes.
From those experiences, it sounds like you had
a more personal insight into how everything that
each of us perceivably individually
do, think, feel impacts the oneness.
Yes. Think of it this way. Let's say any of
the list of negative qualities that we have
personally that we're bothered by and we would
like to get rid of and we would like to transform,
etc., etc. None of those are private. All of these
are part of a social configuration. Any problem
we have personally is part of a social problem.
It's part of a cultural problem. So where is the
line between solving my personal issue and
the society solving its collective issue?
Now classically in Western thought, we have
thought we're all individual monads. We can't
communicate with each other. We're all
separate, self-contained, egoic structures.
So we're kind of, we may be one in aggregate,
but we're really just a whole bunch of people
shoved up against each other and we each have
our own individual experience. But I don't think
that's the way it works. At least that's not
what I was shown. What I have experienced is that
each human being is a cell in the tissue of
humanity. Every mind is a light, a cell of light
in the fabric of human consciousness. And
even our bodies are cells within the body of
humanity as a whole. And that just as we don't,
none of our problems, our issues, our virtues,
we arrive at them individually. We kind of arrive
at them together collectively. They're part of an
historical landscape, part of a
cultural landscape. Also when we
solve our problems, when we have
spiritual breakthroughs, when we
have psychological breakthroughs,
those breakthroughs radiate out
into the world and they touch lives. Now that's
all spiritual traditions have recognized this.
Christian, Jewish, Muslim, Buddhist, Hindu
traditions have recognized this collective nature.
One of the ways I experienced it as kind of
empirically demonstrated was in my classroom.
Because all the years when I was working very
intensely with psychedelics, I was working very
privately and because they were illegal,
I couldn't talk about it. And
I never talked to my students
about my own personal psychedelic practice. But
what I found over time was that my psychedelic
practice was impacting my students. And I began
to have experiences or have access to their minds
in a way that was showing me that my
individual process of transformation
was radiating out and influencing other
people's processes of self-transformation.
And this I was completely, I didn't expect this
at all. And it took me a while, it took me years
really to understand what was happening until
eventually I wrote my book, The Living Classroom,
which has now just come out in a new edition
where I can explicitly say that the practices
that I was doing, which was driving this
kind of collective awakening in my classroom,
was a psychedelic practice primarily. But it was
showing me that truly we are in a boundaryless
condition, not just in high subtle mystical
states of awareness, but we are in a boundaryless
condition all the time, that there's an always
a porosity, an interconnectedness between what's
going on in our life and what's going on in
the world around us. So that I think we have
more and more reason to believe that when we live
our life well and when we rise to the challenges
that are presented to us in life, whatever
they are, whether they're surgical, political,
social activists, meditative, psychological,
whatever they are, artistic, whatever those
breakthroughs are, that those breakthroughs
have a nourishing effect on everyone around us.
Among the world's spiritual
traditions and religions,
some of them are advocates or proponents
of reincarnation. They just take it as a
given, it's natural. And then there are other
religions and practices where some have suggested
that has been removed from those religious
practices. And I'm just wondering if you can
comment about that, because there are people who
might adhere to a particular religion where they
have been taught. Reincarnation just does not
exist. And in fact, you have one shot to get it
right. And that's it, you're either going to go
to heaven or hell, or maybe purgatory. If you're
really screwed up, you could also go there.
Yeah, isn't that interesting? It's interesting.
You know, religions have many levels to them.
There's kind of the exterior lay level of
religion, and then there's the esoteric, mystical,
high deep spiritual practitioner level of
religion. And what we find is
that some religions like the
religions of the East, Buddhism, Hinduism, even
Taoism, they naturally affirm reincarnation.
But even in the West, where reincarnation
is not absorbed into the primary religions,
it's often present in the mystical branch
of that religion. So that in Judaism,
Judaism doesn't affirm reincarnation, rabbinic
Judaism doesn't at a collective level.
But Hasidism, the mystical tradition in Judaism,
it does. And likewise, in Islam, traditional
mainstream Islam does not place any emphasis
on reincarnation. But mystical Islam, the Sufi
tradition, does affirm reincarnation. With
Christianity, it's a little more complicated
because Christianity tended to execute any of
its mystics who were affirming reincarnation.
There have been crusades, of course,
against the Cathars and others.
When we look back at the history of Christianity,
it appears that reincarnation was taught by
certain early sects within Christianity. It was
taught in what later came to be called Gnostic
sects, which were then decided to be heretical and
not accepted. But it was taught as a standard kind
of operating interpretation of Christianity for
hundreds of years. But then as the ecclesiastical
church began to consolidate itself under the,
remember the background, this around third,
fourth century AD, under the falling of the
collapse of the Roman Empire and a really
disintegration of order at the social level, the
church really believed that its survival depended
upon a strong ecclesiastical center. Reincarnation
gave too much autonomy to individuals to work out
their own reincarnation. So
a particular council was held
and there was a decision that reincarnation
was not going to be included as an acceptable
form of Christianity for this particular reason,
I think. It's not that it's incompatible with the
teaching of Jesus. They never said that it
was incompatible. It's that it gives too
much autonomy. It undermines
the primacy of ecclesiastical
authority in the church. Now that may have been
helpful for Christianity at that time. It may
have helped Christianity survive the dark ages
that followed. But now that we have reincarnation
evidence coming forward from scholarly sources,
there is nothing in Christianity that prohibits
Christians from reassessing that old teaching
and looking at it anew. We know that from several
national surveys that approximately 25% of
American Catholics believe in reincarnation,
and it's about the same
number for Protestants, 26%
for Protestants. And so clearly 25% of Catholics
aren't waiting for a papal encyclical saying that
reincarnation is okay to accept. In fact,
the largest chapter I have in my book in
life cycles is a chapter on
reincarnation in Christianity
where I, as most of my students who I
was teaching at this state university,
they came out of Christian backgrounds. They were
also trained to follow the evidence, to believe,
let your beliefs be guided
by the evidence. So they were
having evidence of reincarnation presented
to them, and yet their religious tradition
said that evidence can't be true, but they saw the
quality of the evidence. And in this chapter, I'm
basically sharing my experiences with students,
helping them understand how they can reevaluate
reincarnation and what a reincarnationist
Christianity might look like. And I outline
a minimal option and a maximal option,
but trying to show the way in which you can
affirm deep Christian values and even a dogma
and incorporate a reincarnation element. And
it makes more sense, you know, because the real
devilment of Western theology, which believes, or
Christian theology, which believes in a one-time
through metaphysics, is that it makes life
radically inexplicable. Why do some people
have so much and some people have so
little? Why are some people so
burdened with pain and suffering
and some people just have so much ease in their
lifetime? And ultimately, this gets thrown into
an inscrutable God, a God that makes no sense
whatsoever. We just can't understand it. We just
have to live it and abide by its jurisdiction,
and hopefully things will work out well.
But when you open up to a reincarnational
perspective, suddenly certain possibilities
emerge and things begin to make more sense.
And suddenly, the inscrutability is not God's
inscrutability. It's an
inscrutability that is introduced
by believing something which isn't true,
and that is that we live on life only once. Now,
let's be careful. We have to say these things
carefully. Chris Bache only lives once. Soul,
which Chris Bache is part
of, that soul lives more than
once. So, you know, you just have to, you know,
say things carefully to make your points clear.
Yeah, the personality or the identity of
Chris Bache or Emmy Vadnais lives once.
However, the soul that is our consciousness, our
energy or animates us or however you term that,
lives on perhaps forever.
Lives on. That's right.
It's like each personality, each
incarnation is a facet of the diamond.
The diamond lives forever. The facet
doesn't necessarily live forever. Well,
it lives forever in the diamond,
but the diamond lives forever. Yeah.
The story of Jesus's death, where he rises
on the third day, some have suggested that
is really a metaphor for reincarnation.
It's an interesting question, and I have
an appendix in life cycles where I address
interpretations of certain biblical passages
which have been offered to suggest that Jesus
himself believed in reincarnation. You know,
we get into a real biblical studies, you know,
rabbit hole on that one. Yeah. Yeah, and my sense
is that I don't think there's compelling evidence
that he did teach reincarnation, but there
certainly is very strong evidence that his
teaching is compatible with reincarnation. Yeah,
I mention it because it is a very
significant holiday Easter for many
Christians and Catholics.
My first love, my first
academic pursuit was in New Testament
studies, and I learned Greek and Hebrew,
and I really was going to become a New Testament
scholar, but I changed and shifted later on. But
up through my masters, I was
doing biblical studies work.
We learned that the oldest gospel, Mark's gospel,
does not have a resurrection, does not have an
empty tomb seen in it. In
fact, it ends with death,
and the power, the influence of the story of the
resurrection was so strong from the later gospels,
Matthew, Luke, and John, that there was an actual,
a new ending added in the last chapter of Mark's
gospel to include that kind of experience.
I think that when we ask historically,
what is the deepest level of experience that may
lie behind the belief in the resurrection,
I think it is the experience that Jesus' followers
experienced him as being alive, even though he
was dead. He was alive, and
therefore death is conquered.
Christian theology tended to interpret that in
unique terms that made Jesus' survival of death
somehow unique, and he was uniquely the Son of
God, and uniquely sharing this gift with humanity,
who accepts it on faith. That's one way of
interpreting it, and another way of interpreting
is that what he's showing us is a universal
truth, that when we die, we are still alive.
We are still alive. There's a
larger dynamic unfolding here.
Going back to the oneness that physics shows
seems to be a reality with quantum entanglement.
Some people really embrace that, find it
beautiful, such as yourself. I think it's
quite beautiful, although there are
probably people listening to this thinking,
well, I don't want to be a part of that other
individual, and I know it's not just humans,
there's also creatures and animals and
bacteria that we're all a part of as well.
I'm wondering if you want to
comment on those thoughts.
I think when we first begin to entertain
possibilities that we are larger than we
conventionally have thought that we are, and that
we have these interconnections which are larger
than we thought that we are, I understand the
kind of fear and reflex to draw back and say,
not me, that doesn't work. That's understandable.
It's a natural reflex, but if we let that pass
and we sort of relax and begin to look at the
data, if we begin to look at near-death episode
research, people who get glimpses of what's
going on behind the scenes, and we look at not
just a few of them but look at hundreds of them
and begin to sort out the universal threads that
run through their accounts, when we look at
past-life therapy research and look at the
demonstrated continuity between lives and the
richness which emerges in a person's life when
they untangle some of those knots from their
past. When we just begin to look deeply into
where did this come from, where did this
body-mind come from, and we trace its long
evolutionary pedigree back through its physical
pedigree on the emergence of our beautiful body,
it turns out that the mind has a similar, elegant,
magnificent pedigree reaching back through time,
and the more we absorb the fact that this body
is not ours privately and our mind is not ours
privately, it's always been a collective summation
in a way, always from the start, then I think that
feeling of anxiety or pushback softens
and we begin to open to a different world,
and it's not a world that dissolves the
individual or washes out the individual,
it's a world which actually affirms the individual
very deeply, but it contextualizes the individual
within a web work of interconnections which is
larger than the individual, which we draw from
and we give back to, just as a leaf draws energy
from the tree and gives back energy to the tree,
and it becomes a natural way of seeing things,
it's just an easy secondary way of seeing things,
and I'm glad the physicists have jumped on with
quantum physics and unified systems theory and
all those good things, but fundamentally this can
be an experiential thing, that when we quiet our
mind, when we calm our heart and we enter into
deeper states of self-aware stillness, then there
are perceptions, there are instincts which are
usually so subtle that we don't notice them,
but in the space of a quiet meditative mind these
things make themselves felt, and when these arise
you begin to realize that it's like they're
threads that connect us to other people's lives,
that there's no breaking these threads,
they're part of the fabric of life,
just like there's no breaking the threads between
any one leaf on a tree and other leaves on the
tree, they are connected into the same organism.
Yeah, and the roots of the trees, the roots,
I like how you're describing it as a
collective mind or collective consciousness
that we are all a part of, and I agree with you,
I had the pleasure of speaking with Jill Bolte
Taylor who has written the book My Stroke of
Insight, and followed up where she had a stroke
and the left side of her brain went offline
and she only had the right side of her brain,
and she talked about how she felt this merging
of oneness and could even sense the energy that
people were bringing into her space even if they
were just visiting for no less than five minutes,
and she wrote a follow-up book about
Whole Brain Living because she wanted to
share with people how they can also have these
experiences as well. What is the significance
of reincarnation, how does karma play
a role with that, and how does it
give meaning to our lives or even change
our lives if we engage with that potential?
Well, that's a large question. So let me just
start with how it impacted me and share with you
maybe some of how it impacts the students that
I've shared these ideas with for decades. First,
I think it changes everything. It makes life more
intelligible. It makes the experience that all of
us have make more sense. All of us have things
that we know how to do that no one ever taught us,
or we have aptitudes towards certain types of
activities that are different from everyone
else in our family. Some people are oriented
towards private intellectual chess-like games,
and other people like full contact rugby and
social things. There's all these differences.
Some people have tremendous capacity to create
in art and music, and other people are writers.
Where do those come from? Where do
those qualities and traits come from?
Classically, we think they come through genetic
mutation. It's random. It's just accidental.
There's no logic to it. You got a good luck?
Good. You good genes? Good. They're great.
But when you actually sink into them, it begins
to make more sense that everything which is large
in a life comes from a line of choices where
at some time in our past, they were small.
An interest in music begins small, but it's
practiced and it develops until eventually
you have someone like Mozart who's
writing concertos when he's six years old.
Everything which is large, even in one case I'm
remembering from past life cases, an ability with
guns, an ability to be very facile and very quick
draw came from a history of a former life of a
marshal on the frontier. That makes sense.
It also is grounds for hope because it means
not that we're a prisoner of our past, but we
operate within a context which has been shaped
by our past. Within that context, we make choices
which then feed into our future and our future
lives future. It's a very empowering position
because even though you may be temporarily
burdened if you are by something that's got a
deeper history, you have the power to change
your history. You have a power to exert your will
and exert your choices, make better choices or
stronger different choices and lead into a
better future. When you look at the world through
reincarnationist eyes, you
realize that everybody's playing
a different game. They're not playing your
game. I think of it like school. There are some
people who are in kindergarten and first grade,
some people who are in high school, some people
are doing postgraduate work. That gives you
tremendous permission to let people be themselves,
just to let them be because they're working on
their court, their rules that they're working on,
somebody else is working on a different court,
different rules. The idea that we all have to
get past the same finish line at the same time
in order for things to work out right, we all have
to be saved before we die or something like this,
that doesn't make nearly as much sense as we are
developing flower garden. We are different types
of flowers which are developing and emerging
over large periods of time. We have an open-ended
amount of time with which to develop ourselves. I
tell my students sometimes the only important
question you should be asking yourself is,
what do you want to be doing in 10,000 years?
That's a simple question. Simple question, but
provoking, isn't it? Oh, well, I'm joking. It's
profound. Yeah. It's like, take the large
perspective, people. The creative intelligence
of the universe thinks large. It doesn't think
small, right? The greatest
thing about reincarnation
and the Hindus thought this was a burden. When
they discovered reincarnation, they thought,
oh my God, we go round and round and round. We
have to go through puberty all these times. We
have to go through the hardship of life over and
over and over again. They did not think it was a
joy. They thought it was a burden, but I think
we can appreciate that the greatest burden in the
psyche of the modern man, modern humanity, is this
terrible idea that we are nothing more than our
biology. Everything mental condenses to physics
and that when the body dies, our mind disappears
and dissolves. We're nothing. There's no survival
of the body. Reincarnation puts the myth to that.
It shows us that we are developing over vast
tracts of time, and that allows us to elevate
our assessment of what the purpose of life
might be. If I give an in-class test a quiz,
I have a right to expect a certain set of
results. If I give them an hour-long test,
I expect more because I've given them more
time. If I give them a research paper,
I expect more because they have more time to
develop it. If the universe has a purpose,
if it has a purpose, it should be proportionate
to the amount of time we have to realize that
purpose. If we only have one lifetime, remember
for some people that's just five minutes before
they're dead out of the delivery room.
Sometimes it's five days. If life has a purpose,
it can't be greater than the amount of
time we have to realize that purpose.
With reincarnation, we learn that we
have open-ended infinite amount of time.
That doesn't cause us to be lazy. Anybody who
wants to say, oh, I'll just deal with it later,
they're stupid. They haven't really taken
into how hard it is to be working here.
But when we have open-ended amount of time, it
lifts the ceiling and it allows us to look at the
beautiful pictures that come from the Hubble
telescope, for example, pictures of our galaxies
and nebulas and the infinite depth of the
universe and to recognize that we aren't
just a little bitty short 100-year part player in
this drama. We are an ancient player in this drama
and it allows us to look at the magnificent
grandeur of a galaxy and recognize that we have
a meaningful part in this magnificent galaxy's
unfolding of intelligence on its planets, around
its suns. That changes everything, doesn't it?
What do you feel the purpose of our individual
karma is that contributes to the collective? What
are we reincarnating toward? Well, let me kind of
start with a general observation, then go to
the more specific observations. What are we
reincarnating toward? To me, the boundary between
individual and collective has been made poor so
many times that I see it as one living organism
with different kind of folks eye of light.
The individual is an individual but it's
contextualized within an individuality of
a species and our species
as a single consciousness
is an individual. I mean, its humanity on planet
Earth is different than some other species
on some other planet and some other galaxy.
The mind of our species, the collective psyche,
the memory of our species is unique in its history
and in its components. In our mind, we are part of
that. So my understanding is we live in a constant
dialogue, a constant transmission back and forth
between the collective and the individual to the
collective. So then we ask the question, okay,
what are we evolving toward? Where is it taking
us? And that gets us into very interesting
territory. Probably the large majority of
the answers that we would give that we are
evolving to love or to compassion or to
knowledge or something like this, inevitably
that probably is going to end up being too small
because we're going to formulate those goals
out of our particular moment in history and take
something good and project it forward. But ask
the same question in 5,000 years and we'd probably
give a different richer answer. So I think the
safest answers are in terms of process answers,
not in terms of goal answers. I tend to think
the essence of the whole process is growth
and empowerment of the nature that we have,
the empowerment of the form that we are.
Growth. Growth toward what? That comes the
tricky part. I mean, I would like to say
growth towards oneness, growth towards
love, growth towards wisdom, growth towards,
I mean, literally intelligence, more intelligence,
more aesthetic capacity, more creative capacity,
more communion between human intelligence and
spiritual intelligence. But those are just limited
intermediate baby steps, I think, but that there
is a progression towards growth I think we can
extract from the evolutionary record and also
a growth towards individuality. I think of
reincarnation as a higher octave of evolution.
Evolution evolves whole groups forward. It folds
learning forward of whole groups. Reincarnation
folds the learning forward of individuals within
certain species. Nature has somehow found
a way of kind of letting individuals run
forward in time. Where is it going to go?
Well, we've been doing it for hundreds of
thousands of years and the universe has been
evolving for 13.7 billion years and it's going
to continue for hundreds of billions of years yet.
Where are we going? I mean, what could we become
if we had 10,000 years to work with? We'll
become more. I think we'll become better.
We'll become more in tune with reality and I
deeply mean spiritual reality. We'll become
stronger because we'll be working together to
solve our problems instead of fighting over
a small plate of food. We'll become more. How
can people engage in the karmic and reincarnation
process more consciously? Because I imagine there
are those listening thinking, well, I have a
horrible lot in this lifetime. I don't want to be
here anymore. I'm never coming back here. In fact,
some people truly believe that this is a prison
planet and it's run by dark forces that are trying
to control us or that do control us. Yeah, my
heart goes out to people who are suffering that
much pain. I mean, I know people who are suffering
that much pain and I think inevitably when we try
to understand what's going on, inevitably we kind
of project out of our own living circumstance.
So if we see ourselves living on a planet that's
a prison planet controlled by dark forces,
I mean, I can't help but think that there is a
projection of one's own psychological experience
into metaphysical parameters. And I can only
suggest that as you get clearer, as you go
through deepening your experience of your
own life through various spiritual practices
and by living as good a life as we can live,
as fair and compassion, as just and compassion
and generous life as we can live, your mind gets
clearer. The forces that constrict your life
loosen and you begin to realize that all along,
you in very subtle and often mysterious ways,
you are controlling the flow of energy that
is your life. And if you've made choices that
have constricted that flow in the past, you
can reverse those choices in the present.
If you've had bad karma, constrictive, tight
karma in the past, you can choose, begin to choose
different generous karma, clear karma. And all
the spiritual traditions have procedures to help
you move into deeper clarity. The Buddhists
start with the four noble truths. They start
with the fundamental truths
of do no harm, do no injury,
right speech, right conduct, so on so forth.
Every religion has these commandments, if you
will, these guidelines, how to clear your mind,
how to clear your mind, how to clear your heart.
As you clear your mind and clear your heart,
a different picture of the universe emerges,
one which is not governed by dark forces,
though clearly if you look at certain political
movements and certain social movements and
movements of war and whatnot, there's a lot of
darkness and there's a lot of oppressive forces
and there's a lot of greed and negativity in
there. But your experience of the universe itself
changes. It opens into a divine banquet,
a wonderful mystery, but a divine banquet.
And how do I connect with that? I mean, how do
I begin to change my life so that I can begin to
have that kind of experience or I can feel that
affinity with the fellow human beings who are
traveling with me? This is kind of like basic
spirituality 101. So anything which you do which
favors yourself over someone else, stop doing
that. Everything you do which hurts other
people around you, stop doing that. Every
time you injure someone with your speech,
stop doing that. And just the whole
system slowly begins to calm down.
And then there are other techniques which teach
you how to bring your mind underneath all the
turbulence that's on the
surface. And we can just start
to live a lifestyle which is calmer, quieter,
more peaceful. It doesn't mean we're not in the
world. We're in the world. We're making a living.
We're doing our jobs. We have to deal with
everything everybody else does. But you can
engage it in a different way. And as you
individually come into greater clarity,
I think crystallizing around you will
be opportunities of greater growth around you.
We are not trapped by our karma. Karma is simply
a platform. We can reach beyond our past and to
create a future, which may still have its own
challenges, but it'll be
clearer, it'll be gentler,
more exciting. Can you share a little bit more
about your understanding of karma? Because some
people listening might be thinking, well, it's
simply cause and effect, or maybe even a form of
punishment. Not punishment, but certainly cause
and effect. In Hindi terms, it's karma-vipaka,
cause and effect. And so the basic idea is this.
We live in an entire universe of cause and effect.
Everything has cause. Everything has effects.
Everything. There's not a single part of this
universe which doesn't have
cause and effect except the
fundamental ground state. It's all cause and
effect. So we don't have any problem with that
in the scientific world. We recognize molecules,
atoms, movement of things, they have cause and
effect. No problem. Now that we get to the nub
of it, the Hindus would say, and ancient
traditions would say, choice
has cause and effect. The
choices we make, which is to say we are learning
systems. We are constantly learning. And when we
make a choice, we are basically setting in motion
a trajectory of learning. When we make a choice to
push away something or to include something, to
hurt or to support, we are always making choices.
Those choices basically echo back around and
become part of our subsequent experiences.
One of the easiest ways to describe some of the
logic of this, when people talk about good karma
and bad karma inheriting the consequences
of technically it's the good vipaka that
comes from good action, the bad vipaka
that comes from bad action, bad karma.
When we are experiencing these cycles, what's
at the center of it is giving the human being
incredible power to control their destiny. They
may not be able to control it in the short term
because there's so much momentum in the
system. But if you begin to systematically
engage the momentum of the causal forces powering,
pushing your life, you can begin making clearer
and clearer and clearer choices. And as you begin
making clearer choices, your inner environment
becomes clearer and your outer environment begins
to become clearer. For Hinduism, this would be
simple Dharma 101. This is just kind of how life
works. We are here to grow. We are here to learn.
An academic transcript is a history of grades
in various courses. You could say it's karma.
You make choices. You make
choices to pay attention,
not to pay attention, to apply yourself,
not to apply yourself. You make choices.
The cumulative effect of all those choices
is your transcript at the end of college.
It's like that in life. We're
making choices constantly.
There's nothing magical or infamous about karma.
It's just reminding us that not only does the
physical world move according to cause and effect,
but our psychological world also moves according
to cause and effect, and our spiritual world does
too, except that there is a depth in the spiritual
level. There may be also in
the quantum level as well,
but there is a depth in the physical level
which you discover deep inside your center
that is not part of cause and
effect. It's outside of cause
and effect. The spiritual traditions make a great
deal of emphasis of reducing the turbulence of
karma, cause and effect, until one can actually
experience the aspect of your own being which is
free of cause and effect. When they describe
one's essential nature, one's divine nature,
it never begins, it never ends. It doesn't
have a beginning and end. It's always present.
It's always stable. Karma has beginning and end.
It runs around, does all sorts, like a playground,
but underneath there is this reality
which has neither beginning nor end.
Spiritual practice is about living more of your
life from that reality rather than living your
life from that turbulence, cause and effect. What
role do historical traumas and collective traumas
play in what we're experiencing here on earth? Of
course, I know you mentioned earlier there's a lot
of pleasant attributes we bring with us as well.
All the virtues of history are poured into us,
that surround us, as well as all the burdens of
bad choices of history, all the sins of history.
We seem to be in a very intense time now. We're
coming into a critical time in human history.
We've never been here before. We've had
pieces of continents in danger, but now we
have an entire planet that's in danger of becoming
unable to sustain our population. And we're doing
it. It's human-made. We're making the choices.
We're causing the problem. Nature is not causing
the problem. We are causing the problem.
And so, we seem to be in a time of increasing
turbulence, disruption, chaos. We're dealing
with a lot of social uncertainty and social
divisiveness because many people are not clear
how to face the challenges that were coming into
us as species. We know that global climate change
is going to have enormous impact.
We're going to be losing many,
many, many lives in the near future,
in the future. And this leads to uncertainty and
a lot of turbulence. And if we look at this same
situation from within a deep spiritual perspective
and we ask, what is causing this inner turbulence?
Well, in some ways, I look towards
the lives of individual mystics.
When we look at the life of an individual
mystic, this is well documented and testified
that before the breakthrough of enlightenment,
before the breakthrough of the universal
one heart, we go through the dark night of
the soul. We go through a period of deep,
deep, intense personal cleansing. And another
way of thinking about this from a reincarnational
perspective is that we're cleaning the basement.
All the things inside of us which are incompatible
with enlightenment, all the history which has
led us to have convictions and urges and whatnot,
which are incompatible with universal love,
are being forced out of the system. And in your
meditation, the spiritual practitioners can
experience that. They experience upheavals
coming up from within them. Sometimes they're
crying on the meditation cushion. Sometimes
they're feeling unspeakable rage, but the advice
is always the same. Keep centered, let it flow
through you. It will pass. It will move through
you. If we kind of think of the entire species
as a single meditating being, I think something
like this is happening. I personally think we
are entering into a profoundly important, very
positive turning point in human evolution,
which will take us into a
higher level of psycho-spiritual
functioning at an across-the-board
platform. For us to actualize this, for
us to realize this, we have to clear ourselves of
everything which is keeping us from experiencing
this state right here, right now, today.
And the things which are keeping us from
experiencing this is all our collective
karma and collective history and all our cultural
institutions and the history that each of us
carry individually and we all carry collectively
together. So I think that we are actually
experiencing a time of tremendous purification.
It's kind of like you have to expose the shadow
before you can heal the shadow. And we
are certainly exposing the
shadow of humanity right now
in many of the very destructive and self-absorbed
and injurious policies or practices that are
arising in our midst. I think of this as kind of a
collective purification, which is part and parcel
of leading into a spiritual awakening,
the deep and profound spiritual awakening.
Yes, Carl Jung and the shadow, focusing
on our own individual shadow selves or
letting ourselves maybe heal from what ails us.
What would you suggest people consider doing
as far as do they primarily focus on their own
selves and or assisting the collective? I mean,
I understand what you're saying that as we focus
on ourselves, we're part of the collective.
It's a both-hand situation, isn't it? Because
while an enlightened individual in a monastery,
in a mountain with no contact in the world
may have an uplifting effect on the whole,
that person has that reality. Most of us live
embodied in the world, and we would like to do
more than have a meditative effect, uplifting the
collective from the ground. We would like to do
something practical. I mean, we'd like to help
the world be a better place, leave it a better
place before we die. We'd like to sort of help
people in need or help to solve the problems that
are endemic to our culture. If we do that or
try to do that without deep inner clarity,
we may get some success, but we'll also leave more
damage behind too. So I think it's a both-hand
becoming socially active to work for social
clarity, social peace, and to be personally,
inwardly clear and at peace with oneself. I did
this years and years of psychedelic practice and
other spiritual practices that time, but I was
always working as an academic. I was working hard
at an open enrollment university and trying to
raise that corner. That was my garden. That was
where I worked and where I was trying to make
things better. And all of my colleagues, they
had their gardens. They were working to make
things better in the world. And so I don't think
it's an either or. I think some people
are drawn more to this incarnation,
to an individual interior
project. Other people are drawn
more to an exterior social project.
There's not a right or wrong
here. I think it's both-and.
What would you like to say to someone
who may be listening, thinking,
well, I'm doing my part, but that person or
that group or that institution or that country
is really messing things
up and they're the problem?
Yeah. And they may be. And there are
certainly people, other players in the world,
besides ourselves, and they're doing bad things
in the world. Any right-thinking person would
want to try to mitigate those bad things. If
we see someone beating a child, naturally,
we try to intervene, to stop without
thinking. We do it to protect the child.
But at a deeper level, a more philosophical
level, one of the things that comes with the
reincarnational worldview and understanding the
deep, deep forces that guide people's lives and
set up circumstances is it's an absolute waste of
time to be envious of someone else's good fortune.
You should never judge someone else's bad
fortune. We don't know what got them there.
We don't know whether this is a saint or a sinner.
It could be a sinner inheriting bad karma or it
could be a saint who's taken on somebody else's
bad karma. We don't know. Best to take care of
your own shop. Best to do the very, very best
you can with the circumstances in which you find
yourselves in because there's
meaning and intention in those
circumstances. Engage that part of the
outside world which is yours to engage.
A lot of it is recognizing
that people are at different
stages of their life, their soul's life, and we
have to stand the ground that we need to stand
but most of our judgments aren't about standing
ground. It's just being judgmental in the way
that creates more barriers that only have to
be taken down later. Judgments are barriers.
There's a way in which we can draw conclusions
but without living within the harsh boundaries
of judgments. Do you feel we're going
through a collective near-death experience
even though we don't really die since
our consciousness seems to continue?
Yeah. I think we are going through something like
that. What happens when people have a near fatal
accident and we know that when their mind speeds
up, they become able to do physical things that
they would never have dreamed that they could do.
If they're falling off a mountain, they can take
action along the way. The mind speeds up and often
the heart opens, the mind opens. One enters into
transcendent spaces under the pressure of almost
dying. Now, it's not being alarmist to say that
we are going into a near extinction event on
this planet. The crises which have only now just
beginning to start are going to be getting worse
and everything we're doing in this country,
I'm afraid, politically is going to make that
crisis, that confrontation with the planet's
limits even harder and more severe. Clearly, we're
going into very, very difficult and challenging
times and there are some very smart people, good
clear-thinking people who basically have concluded
that's it. Humanity is toast. We're living
on extended time. There's no reversing this
process. We're going to go extinct. We're
going to die. We just don't know it yet.
But if you look at the statistics, you look
at the information, you look at the patterns,
we're going extinct. I personally don't think
we are going extinct, but I don't believe that
like on rational calculus grounds. I believe it
because of my spiritual experiences that we do
make it through this crisis. But it clearly is
going to be a planet-changing crisis. It's going
to be a civilization-changing crisis. It's going
to be a near-death experience of our culture,
of our life on this planet. And we might learn
something about what might happen during it
if we study people, individuals who have had
near-death experiences. So I think we are,
I think things are speeding up. I think things
are becoming dire. I think there are fewer and
fewer innocent decisions. Every decision has
infinite ramifications. I think we're coming
into a make or break point. We're coming into
a point of grow up or die. And the threat of
extinction is a tremendous
evolutionary accelerator.
And I think we're coming into a time where we're
beginning to realize that if we don't change our
practices, we're going to lose our life on this
planet. And that core deep down inside, this
transformation that's required is not simply
a transformation of politics or economics
or industrial production or agricultural.
It's not that primarily. It is fundamentally
a crisis of consciousness. It is the structure
of human consciousness that has gotten us
into this mess. It's the limitations of ego,
the loneliness, the self-centeredness of our
so-called cut-off ego that has led us into
these dead-end scenarios of just consuming
more and more and more, but not experience any
satisfaction that really gives us any deep, true
psychospiritual nourishment. We either make it
through this crisis or we go extinct.
I personally, because that's
the visions I've been given,
I think we make it through. My concern is
how many of our children and grandchildren
and great-grandchildren are going to die before
we make it through. That's my major concern.
There may be those listening, thinking,
well, if there is this oceanic
wave of love and oneness, why does
it have to get so bad or hard?
Why do we have to get to this point?
Why do we have to suffer so much? Why does
there have to be pain and suffering and people
being treated poorly and dying a bodily death
when maybe they didn't otherwise have to?
Yeah. Boy, that's a hard question. You're
asking hard questions today.
Because you're basically asking
the question, why is there suffering?
If there is intelligence and wisdom
and love as a starting point of
creation, why is it so damn hard?
Why do we suffer so much? Why didn't somebody give
us an instruction manual to help us do better?
Why is it so hard? We get angry at the divine
intelligence and we think we could do it better.
If I were doing this universe, I could design
a better universe. There wouldn't be as much
suffering. We'd do it differently.
But all of that assumes that we know
what is being built. We judge from the context of
our own historical position and we make judgments
about what a good humanity would look like or what
a spiritually realized humanity would look like
or just what a peaceful humanity would look
like. And this is how we could build toward that.
But maybe we're not building toward
that. Maybe we're building through that.
Clearly, the creative intelligence thinks on a
huge landscape. When you really just meditate
on what astrophysics has taught us and astronomy
has taught us, the landscape of creation is vast
and magnificent. So we have to genuinely ask
ourselves, okay, what is this intelligence
creating in this species? What is the project?
Where are we going? What might we become?
And if we expand in even lightly 100,000
years, which is a second in cosmic time,
even if we imagine what would be the best
that we could become in 100,000 years,
we might begin to understand where suffering
fits into this larger agenda, which is larger
than most of our agenda. Most of us would think
if we could just get comfortable and be a happy
human being as we are and live, eat, and die,
we'd be okay. But maybe that's not the agenda
of existence at all, of the creative intelligence.
And I don't mean to treat people suffering
cavalierly. I truly do not mean so. I mean, it's
all great respect to those who suffer, honestly.
But suffering in some ways in our time is like
when we're building a house and we have the walls
up, the stud walls up, and we have the trusses up
that we haven't put on the roof. And if it rains,
rain comes in. It's because
the house is unfinished.
It's not because there's any structural
design flaw in the house. The house is just
not finished. Humanity is an unfinished species.
Sri Aurobindo made a large point of this. He
talked about how humanity
is a transitional species.
We are transitioning from what we were 100,000
years ago into what we are in the process of
becoming deep. We are not the end of the project.
We are just in the middle of the project.
In that context, if we take disease, for
example, we are only at the early stages
of developing our consciousness so clearly and
strongly that we can heal diseases in our body
with our minds. We know psychoneuroimmunology has
shown us this, but I'm talking about the serious
diseases that seem so resistant to this subtle
manipulation. We are just getting started in
basically exploring the potential of our
consciousness to keep this system healthy
and strong. And some of the suffering of disease,
it's just an unfinished business. We haven't
gotten to the point where we can control
ourselves that much. Our knowledge has not
expanded yet to be able to supplement what we
can do with our mind. There's just so much which
is unfinished. So before we kind of take over
control and blame God for doing such a mess up,
we might examine our own assumptions of what the
purpose of the project is, what the goal of the
project is. Because you're
a man of deep philosophy and
religious and spiritual studies, I know you
mentioned this in your book, in our previous
conversation, and since you brought up God,
can you briefly mention your relationship to that
term? I was raised in a Catholic tradition. I was
studying to be a priest in the early years for
four years. I have learned a lot in watching
religions coming to existence. And in some ways,
dogma is kind of like sausage. You never want to
see one being made because it may look good on
the outside, but boy, a whole lot of personality
gets involved in the forging of dogma in history.
So it's a sobering experience to truly watch how
religions come into existence. And so I've
learned just from the study of history that
one of the most dangerous things that a human
being can say is, I know what God wants you to do.
You should do this. And there are so many
limitations, cultural limitations, historical
limitations that are built into God vocabulary,
into the God language, that I prefer not to use
that term. And I would talk about the divine,
but even the divine is superloaded with historical
associations. And so in the title of my book on
psychedelic work is LSD And
The Mind of the Universe.
And I chose not to kind of concretize that with
an image of divinity because I see those images of
divinity as so historically conditioned that they
weren't large enough to envision what I was trying
to describe. Now we have a sense of how vast the
universe is. We count its distance in light years,
and each light year is six million, million
miles, and we count it in terms of multiple
thousands of light years. And then to imagine
that there is a mind which is as large as this
universe is large, and then to
try to fathom what that mind
might be like, and then to take a journey
in which you self-initiate into the edges of
that vast, expensive mind, several things kind of
happen or less happen to me. One is that I fell
in love. I fell in love with this reality. Once
you experience it in its clarity, it's so powerful
and so magnificent and so beautiful that I call it
my beloved. It is a love relationship with life,
with this deeper intelligence embedded in life.
Now I sometimes talk about the divine, as I have
here, and sometimes I'll even talk about God.
If I feel that the context is clear,
that I'm not using those terms
in their conventional references,
but I'm using to point to what those terms point
to, ideally, this infinitely large horizon,
this expansive beauty, this knowledge, this
genius. We're talking about cosmic genius
in this universe. The hardest thing that I
found in negotiating all of my psychedelic work
was not what happened in that journey during
the sessions. The hardest part came when I
ended that journey and everything was fine.
Everything was good. There was no trauma.
I had been given many, many gifts of intimacy
with the divine, but then when I withdrew and I
stepped out of it and I was no longer making
contact, experiential contact with that deeper
reality for reasons that I explained in the book,
it was the loss of contact with my beloved, even
though I knew the beloved was
always here. I knew that it
was only my own blinders which were keeping
me from experiencing it. I knew it was always the
warp and woof of reality that I was embedded in,
but the intensity of being dissolved into the
body of light that is the underlying light of the
universe, it caused such a deep sadness, a deep
withdrawal. It was very difficult and it really
took me about 10 years after I stopped my sessions
to really get fully grounded and committed to
living in this earth on its terms again. I give
you that anecdote just to say that my journey into
the divine had many stages and many layers over
many years. I would not trade any of those days
for any treasures on earth and learning how
to live without the constant immersion or the
repetitive immersion into those treasures has been
a real learning exercise for me that it continues.
Yeah. Chris, how do you suggest or what do
you recommend are ways that people can
explore themselves, get in touch with the deeper
creative intelligence inside of them to be able to
move that karmic part of them forward? Are there
any particular practices that are maybe outside
or part of psychedelics that can assist people
listening? There's so many practices because what
we're talking about is spirituality and the
Christians have an approach to spirituality,
the Jews, Muslims, Buddhists, they have
an approach to spirituality
with a lot of common ground,
but it's no secret and now we live in a time in
history where these previously secret teachings
are now available on every street corner. You
know, after China invaded Tibet, lineage holders
of this tremendous ancient spiritual lineage
have now flooded into the Western countries
and we have centers throughout the United States
and Europe. We're talking about basic spiritual
practices. We're also talking about maybe
psychotherapeutic practices. We're basically
using a psychotherapeutic approach to heal
some of the surface wounds of the heart.
My first sitter was my wife, Carol,
and she's a clinical psychologist and
she never did a psychedelic
session. It wasn't her cup
of tea. She really found everything
she needed on her meditation cushion.
And just to clarify, by sitter you mean the
person who was with you during your LSD sessions?
Yeah, she was my sitter and holding the fort
while I was in my LSD sessions and she was
managing them with music and whatnot.
She never wanted to do a session herself.
She has subsequently gone on to complete
her three-year, three-month, three-day
solar retreat in the Vajrayana tradition.
She's been made and recognized as a lama
within her community and she has a very,
very rich interior life. We're friends
and it didn't involve psychedelics at all. So
there's so many lineages of spiritual teachings.
There's Celtic lineages, so many Native American
lineages, there's South American lineages, there's
the ayahuasca traditions, there are some
psychedelic shamanic traditions that are
entering our country strongly now. There are
everyday wisdom traditions that are available
in abundance at any bookstore, at any airport.
Sounds true. And this program is an example of
inner teachings being made publicly available.
Even if I started a list, it would be just a
fraction of what's really available. We
can find the practices that can help us
live a calmer, quieter, more centered, richer
life. Those are available and the practices which
are taught are pretty much the same. First,
kindness, non-injury, simplicity, voluntary
simplicity, centering stillness, social
kindness, social being good to people.
And it's a long road and it's not a road which
is going to be traveled in any one lifetime.
And so this is a road that's going
to be traveled over many lifetimes,
but every lifetime can get
better than the life before
it. We've also touched on the shadow part
and in addition and kind of building on what
you just shared, how much of a role does
having a good time, joy, love, following
your own bliss or creativity play a role in
a person's karma and reincarnation? Yeah,
it certainly does. I mean, it's just part of the
fabric. I think because we learn about
reincarnation from reading
the books from therapists,
we have a tendency to cast the thinking
about reincarnation in a negative light
because people go to therapists who are in
pain. But if you are an exceptionally brilliant,
creative composer, you can explore that dimension
of your life and find and trace the roots of your
love of music. And you'll find that it
goes deeper than this present lifetime.
All of our past gives us all of our virtues
and all of our vices. And we honor existence by
accepting the virtues, building on them, and
then working to reduce the vices, to unlock them
and let them go. What role does
self-love play in this process?
How can you love the world if you don't love
yourself? It's one of the things that came
real clear in some of my teachings that if
you're going to become one with the God,
if you're going to become one with all of
life, you must become one with yourself.
And therefore, when you try to become
one with God and one with the universe,
everything which is incompatible with becoming
one with yourself is forced to the surface.
So all of your injuries, all of your trauma,
all of your self-defeating habits and behaviors,
these are all shoved to the surface
right inside you, right in front of you.
So self-love, self-acceptance is absolutely
critical, but not superficial self-love.
Real deep self-love, love that's willing to take
on the shadow, love which is willing to love that
shadow until that shadow becomes a baby in your
arms and you take care of it and nurture it.
You know, the deep love, really deep, the
type of love a mother has for her child,
that love is the type of love we have to
have for ourselves and so we can handle,
we can clean anything that
needs to be cleaned in it.
Unconditional love and unconditional acceptance.
And love covers a multitude of sins.
Well, let's say it compensates, doesn't it?
Chris, you've shared so much today about
collective karma and reincarnation,
and I know we're going to have another
conversation about the birth of a future human
that you discovered in your LSD sessions, and
I'm wondering if you want to just touch on that
a little bit to prime us for our next
conversation and what that's about.
I'd love to. One of the surprises for me in
my psychedelic work, because I began this work
adopting a model of transformation, the model
of personal transformation, which is pretty
widespread in the transpersonal community,
that when you do these practices, it's about
personal transformation, personal awakening,
personal healing, personal enlightenment.
And one of the surprises for
me has been how much of my work
didn't seem to be about me personally at all.
It was about collective, and it was collective
dynamics, and my love for myself expanded to
embrace the love of my people and the love of
my planet and the love of all the beings on the
planet. So it just wasn't about me personally.
As that deepened over the years, I began
to be initiated into a series of visions
where it was not about my spiritual evolution,
it was about the spiritual evolution of humanity,
where humanity was going. And I just want to
emphasize this is an utterly natural phenomenon.
Our individual mind, when we relax the boundaries
of our individual mind, our consciousness opens
and deep into our personal unconscious. But
as you keep clearing and you keep relaxing,
it opens up into this underlying field that
Jung called the collective psyche. And it's just
natural that when you go deeper into that
collective psyche and even pushing through it
to the matrix underneath that, that you inherit
insights into what's going on in the life of this
being. We count our lives in years, it counts
its life in millennia. So it opens up naturally.
And I began to have insights of humanity poised
on the edge of a global death and rebirth process,
that what I had experienced as death and rebirth
and what every meditator experiences in terms of
death and rebirth on the meditation cushion, that
there was actually now fermenting within history
a death and rebirth dynamic that was so large,
so powerful, it was carrying all of humanity
in its grip. This was a surprise, an absolute
surprise to me, but it led me to have a certain
understanding that the project of history at this
point, I think, a way of summing up a project is
to give birth to a new kind of human being, to
giving birth to what I call the future human.
Some people call it homo-spiritualis,
homo-noeticus, there are different words for it.
But a new form of human being who isn't simply the
old human being polished up and cleaned up and,
you know, doing better, but truly a revolution
that causes the plate tectomics of the collective
psyche to shift so that all children born after
this shift takes place, and I'm not talking about
a shift that takes place in 24 hours
but takes place over decades of work.
All children born after this pivot are literally
functioning within a different collective psyche.
This is something that's taking place
at a very, very deep collective level.
And I was given teachings to explain how
this is working out through reincarnation,
what the project of reincarnation is, how does
it play into this. I introduced concepts that
will talk about the birth of the diamond soul,
this integration of all of our former lives coming
into a unity synthesis and leading to
an exponential explosion of insight
and compassion inside the
human heart and human mind.
That's what we're going to be
talking about. We're going to be
talking about where humanity is taking, where
reincarnation is taking humanity, what some of
the mechanisms are trying to understand underneath
the turmoil of our times, which are getting more
and more tumultuous almost year by year, and where
we might be going, what the larger project is.
And I must confess I found what I was given
deeply reassuring because I feel the growing
waves of darkness. I feel the chaos and I see
the social struggle that we don't know how to
navigate the falling apart process. But I take
great strength in being given an understanding
of what's going on here at a deeper level. And
that's what I'd like to share with you in our next
conversation. Well, I'm very much looking forward
to the conversation about the birth of the
future human. And Chris, is there anything
else you want to share about collective
karma and reincarnation today? Well, I'll just
share one visionary experience which I share in
LSD And The Mind of The Universe. It was late in
my journey. It was, I don't know, 15 years or so
into my journey. And I had already gone through
multiple layers of death into deeper and deeper
levels. And I opened up into a very, very deep
level in which I experienced all of humanity
as a single organism reincarnating generation
by generation. The entire family of humanity
was going through this developmental process
that all of us individually are going through.
And experiencing all of humanity
in this flow of learning,
and in this flow of perpetual development,
potential integration of more and more spiritual
reality into their lives, was on the one hand,
an extremely uplifting experience. And it was
also a devastating experience because I saw
from the one perspective, you might say that
whole generations will be sacrificed in this
historical transformation we're going through.
And it had the ruthlessness of Kali the Destroyer,
of the gods which bring death and destruction
in order to liberate. And at the same time,
this was not something which is being done
to us. This is a role that we voluntarily
took on as our offering to the creative
intelligence in the evolution of this species
at this point in time. So it was a hard teaching,
and it was a magnificent ecstatic teaching all
at the same time. And the key is just to realize
that what is taking place in the lives of
individuals is also taking place in the lives
of the species. We are all in this world,
and we are all in this together. Ultimately,
we all have to move together. Some people may
get a little ahead, some people may drag a little
behind, but ultimately we are moving together as
we move through this transition. And the
magnitude of the beauty of what we are becoming,
I don't know how I'm going to talk about that
without crying when we talk next. This is so
magnificent. Oh, I know I teared up a few times
in this conversation today. And also when I read
your fabulous book, LSD And The Mind of The
Universe, it is very deeply moving and I look
forward to exploring more with you in the next
conversation. Chris Bache, thank you so much
once again for this incredible conversation that I
hope many find insightful and hopefully uplifting
in this journey of life that we're all a part
of together. Thank you for being with me today.
Thank you, Emmy. It's been a real
pleasure and an honor. Thank you.
My pleasure as well. And for those
of you watching or listening,
thank you for being with us because
you are the reason that we are
here.
Book
four in the New Thinking Allowed dialogue
series, Charles T. Tart, 70 Years of Exploring
Consciousness and Parapsychology,
now available on Amazon.
You can now download all eight copies of
the New Thinking Allowed magazine for free
or order beautiful printed copies.
Go to newthinkingallowed.org.